Chapter 3: The Fourth Bridge
Navani Chapters.svg
The final step in capturing spren is the most tricky, as you must remove the Stormlight from the gemstone. The specific techniques employed by each artifabrian guild are closely guarded secrets, entrusted only to their most senior members.

The easiest method would be to use a larkin—a type of cremling that feasts on Stormlight. That would be wonderful and convenient if the creatures weren't now almost entirely extinct. The wars in Aimia were in part over these seemingly innocent little creatures.

Characters
Navani Kholin (point of view)
Velat
Dalinar Kholin
Ka
Dieno
Lyn
Falilar
Rushu
Lift
Kmakl
Kaladin
Lirin
Fen Rnamdi (mentioned only)
Elhokar Kholin (mentioned only)
Gavilar Kholin (mentioned only)
Adolin Kholin (mentioned only)
Isasik Shulin (mentioned only)
Jasnah Kholin (mentioned only)
The Sibling (mentioned only)
The Nightwatcher (mentioned only)
The Stormfather (mentioned only)
Plot Summary
Navani leans out over the edge of the flying platform to observe the terrain and flora of Alethkar, watching as it is about to land in Hearthstone. The cartographer, Velat, chides Navani for this behavior, but Dalinar says she can do what she wants on her ship. Navani thinks through the design, engineering, organization, and fabrial technology that has allowed them to fly hundreds of miles on this mission. This work has sustained her while mourning Elhokar, and she wishes she could share it with him, even if she thinks her contribution is merely guiding people smarter than her. The flying platform has been named the Fourth Bridge in honor of Kaladin's old team, and the bridge they used has been embedded in the center of the deck as a symbol. There is a full complement of scientists and engineers on the platform, including the Windrunner scribe, Ka, and the ardents Falilar and Rushu.

As the Fourth Bridge sets down, a dozen graceful Edgedancers and Lift disembark and head to the town to usher the people to the transport and heal the wounded. The Windrunners are darting through the sky on watch. Navani discusses the benefits and drawbacks of this new military resource with the Thaylen prince consort, Admiral Kmakl, who has joined them for this first test. Navani then heads over to Dalinar as Kaladin and Lirin approach from the town. Dalinar discusses the logistics of the evacuation with a nonplussed Lirin, who then strides away. Kaladin updates Dalinar on the presence of the Fused and requests Stormlight. Dalinar opens Honor's Perpendicularity to renew Kaladin's Stormlight while Navani writes down her observations. Kaladin pays respect to his old bridge before flying off. Dalinar and Navani discuss her notes. Navani is studying Dalinar's bond with the Stormfather, hoping it will offer some clue about the Sibling and the operation of Urithiru's tower fabrial.

Navani and Dalinar are surprised by the sudden appearance of the Mink. The Mink is wary of Dalinar, the Blackthorn, but is ready to join with him if they will use the flying platform to rescue Herdazian troops. Dalinar quickly agrees without consulting Navani, which irks her. At this point, the refugees begin to arrive at the Fourth Bridge, herded by the Edgedancers. Before Navani can start enacting her evacuation plan, Lyn lands on the deck and warns of three full flights of incoming Fused. Navani prepares to test the precautions she put in place for this eventuality.

