Part 1: Burdens

Chapter 7: The Rarest Vintage
Shallan Flashback Chapters Inverted.svg
The two metals of primary significance are zinc and brass, which allow you to control expression strength. Zinc wires touching the gemstone will cause the spren inside to more strongly manifest, while brass will cause the spren to withdraw and its power to dim.

Remember that a gemstone must be properly infused following the spren's capture. Drilled holes in the gemstone are ideal for proper use of the cage wires, so long as you don't crack the structure and risk releasing the spren.

Characters
Shallan Davar (point of view)
Kaladin (point of view)
Ialai Sadeas
Pattern
Adolin Kholin
Ishnah
Gaz
Red
Sylphrena
Waber
Godeke
Lift
Elhokar Kholin (mentioned only)
Gavilar Kholin (mentioned only)
Gavinor Kholin (mentioned only)
Torol Sadeas (mentioned only)
Dalinar Kholin (mentioned only)
Navani Kholin (mentioned only)
Thanadal (mentioned only)
Loradar Vamah (mentioned only)
Mraize (mentioned only)
Restares (mentioned only)
Jasnah Kholin (mentioned only)
Vathah (mentioned only)
Beryl (mentioned only)
Toralin Roshone (mentioned only)
Plot Summary
Shallan

Veil talks with Ialai, trying to get her to admit to crimes or reveal some other knowledge. Ialai reveals she has access to the Kholin's inner circle and talks about the Sons of Honor; she believes the Ghostbloods killed Thanadal and Vamah, with Restares being the next on the list. She is sure she will be killed and tells Shallan to search for the rarest vintage in her room before others do. Adolin rushes in with soldiers and Lightweaver squires. Shallan's personas debate and decide not to kill Ialai, but she is poisoned to death with blackbane.

Kaladin

Using Godeke as hostage, the Pursuer forces Kaladin to fight indoors and activates a fabrial that disables his Lashings and Shardblade. Kaladin manages to defeat the inexperienced singer soldiers. He anticipates the move of the Pursuer and also kills him. Lift comes to get Godeke out and captures the fabrial for Navani to analyze.

Shallan

Shallan contemplates but discards the idea that she herself poisoned Ialai. She then suspects that the Ghostbloods have a spy among her squires who finished off Ialai when Shallan decided not to. Shallan goes on to search Ialai's room herself.

