Part 1: Burdens

Chapter 9: Contradictions
Navani Chapters.svg
A pewter cage will cause the spren of your fabrial to express its attribute in force—a flamespren, for example, will create heat. We call these augmenters. They tend to use Stormlight more quickly than other fabrials.

Characters
Kaladin (point of view)
Shallan Davar (point of view)
Navani Kholin (point of view)
Adolin Kholin
Dalinar Kholin
Sylphrena
Laran
Laral Roshone
Teft
Tien (mentioned only)
Elhokar Kholin (mentioned only)
Moash (mentioned only)
Hav (mentioned only)
Renarin Kholin (mentioned only)
Lopen (mentioned only)
Jasnah Kholin (mentioned only)
Gavilar Kholin (mentioned only)
Lift (mentioned only)
Pattern (mentioned only)
Ialai Sadeas (mentioned only)
Torol Sadeas (mentioned only)
Lin Davar (mentioned only)
Shallan's mother (mentioned only)
Thanadal (mentioned only)
Helaran Davar (mentioned only)
Mraize (mentioned only)
Iyatil (mentioned only)
Gaz (mentioned only)
Plot Summary
Kaladin

Kaladin returns to the Fourth Bridge, and is handed a cup of broth by an ardent. The Windrunners are congratulating Laran, who has sworn the Third Ideal, but Kaladin doesn't join them. Syl talks to him about his depression and helping him. Teft comes and tells Kaladin to congratulate Laran, and they talk about Moash. Kaladin takes off, going to transport Dalinar and Navani to the Shattered Plains.

Navani

Navani is in a wooden sphere, being Lashed toward the Shattered Plains. While stuck in this cramped chamber, she is contemplating the nature of contradictions and studying the Fused's Radiant suppression fabrial. She finds that the fabrial's four garnet design matches a sketch of the Urithiru gemstone pillar. Navani compares her technological fabrials that require trapped spren and clever applications to Soulcasters, that have no technological explanation and manifest as small unresponsive, though seemingly intelligent, spren in Shadesmar.

Anxious to arrive, she is amusing herself thinking of Dalinar's style of travel, when she notices a blinking red light on the wall and finds a spanreed ruby attached to the bottom of her table. She attaches it to a reed pen and sets it to writing as soon as her vehicle lands. The unknown messenger warns that her imprisonment of spren is causing more pain than any living person and that she must stop creating these new fabrials.

Shallan

Shallan and Adolin are in a carriage going toward the Shattered Plains' Oathgate. Shallan thinks about the truths she's suppressing, and about how people would leave her if they knew what she had done. Veil tells Adolin that Ialai was assassinated, and they discuss about whether it would have been right to kill the highprincess. Shallan shows Adolin the notebook, including a list of words containing "Nalathis", "Scadarial", and "Tal Dain", and at the end the name Thaidakar. Shallan thinks she will have to break with the Ghostbloods.

