Prologue: To Pretend

Characters
Navani Kholin (point of view)
Maratham
Aesudan Kholin
Rushur Kris
Gereh
Elhokar Kholin
Adolin Kholin
Renarin Kholin
Dalinar Kholin
Nale
Gavilar Kholin
Kalak
Jasnah Kholin
Torol Sadeas
Meridas Amaram (mentioned only)
Talanah (mentioned only)
Rine Hatham (mentioned only)
Shalash (mentioned only)
Sadees (mentioned only)
Honor (mentioned only)
The Stormfather (mentioned only)
Cultivation (mentioned only)
Plot Summary
Seven years ago
Navani is occupied with logistics for Gavilar's feast. While managing preparations, she interacts with Aesudan, who is speaking with Rushur Kris, a master artifabrian. She passes through the feast but leaves quickly after seeing Dalinar. Looking for the king, she finds herself outside her study and overhears voices. Her husband is speaking to two men, one a Makabaki and one a Vorin, supposedly ambassadors from the West. On the table between them, she sees strange spheres, which she assumes are meant for fabrials. Gavilar notices her and excuses himself. Navani presses him for answers about the spheres and questions him about missing appointments and responsibilities related to the feast. He, in turn, berates her for rumors of unfaithfulness that have been spreading around the court. They fight about Jasnah's refusal to court Amaram, which becomes a fight about Gavilar's legacy as king. He insults his wife's notion that she is a scholar and says she chose him over Dalinar for power, then leaves. Furious, Navani burns a glyphward which reads, Death. Gift. Death.

After the feast, Navani hears of the assassination. She does not believe that her husband is dead until she personally sees his body. She is stunned, hoping her glyphward did not lead to this outcome. She also feels pity, seeing her husband, who thought he was eternal, dead before her. Remembering the strange spheres from his meeting, she checks his pockets. Finding nothing, she conceals her actions. Navani composes herself and begins the process of picking up the pieces among the chaos of Gavilar's death.

