Part 1: Burdens

Chapter 15: The Light and the Music
Kaladin's Chapters.svg
Logicspren react curiously to imprisonment. Unlike other spren, they do not manifest some attribute—you cannot use them to make heat, or to warn of nearby danger, or conjoin gemstones. For years, artifabrians considered them useless—indeed, experimenting with them was uncommon, since logicspren are rare and difficult to capture.

A breakthrough has come in discovering that logicspren will vary the light they radiate based on certain stimuli. For example, if you make the Light leak from the gemstone at a controlled rate, the spren will alternate dimming and brightening in a regular pattern. This has led to fabrial clocks. When the gemstone is tapped with certain metals, the light will also change states from bright to dim. This is leading to some very interesting and complex mechanisms.

Characters
Kaladin (point of view)
Dalinar Kholin
Sigzil
Sylphrena
Lahar
Rlain
Zahel
Adolin Kholin (mentioned only)
Skar (mentioned only)
Navani Kholin (mentioned only)
Vratim (mentioned only)
Yunfah (mentioned only)
Torol Sadeas (mentioned only)
The Stormfather (mentioned only)
Lunamor (mentioned only)
Cord (mentioned only)
Honor (mentioned only)
Jasnah Kholin (mentioned only)
Azure (mentioned only)
Cultivation (mentioned only)
Hoid (mentioned only)
Szeth (mentioned only)
Odium (mentioned only)
Endowment (mentioned only)
Plot summary
Ten days after the mission to Hearthstone, Dalinar announces Kaladin's change in status, and Kaladin promotes Sigzil and Skar to take over his previous duties. Immediately after the meeting, he goes to the sparring grounds in search of Zahel. Hearing that he is on laundry duty, Kaladin walks toward an outdoor area where they hang clothes to dry. On the way, he passes by a field where Rlain is overseeing rockbud farming with the new listener method that he has revealed to the humans. Kaladin gains Rlain's attention, and they meet in the field to speak. Rlain is at first ecstatic to hear that there is an honorspren that will bond him, but once Kaladin explains that he had told Yunfah either to bond Rlain or leave, Rlain disappointedly refuses the bond. He tells Kaladin about the prejudice he had faced as a parshman that had landed him in Bridge Four, explaining that he wants a spren who will choose him for who he is.

Leaving, Kaladin finds Zahel at the edge of the plateau hanging laundry. He hangs back, and Zahel finally asks him what he wants. When Kaladin explains that he has been forced into retirement, Zahel intuits that he thinks he might belong with the ardentia. Telling Kaladin to prove that he belongs there, Zahel initiates a fight. Kaladin summons Syl as a sword, and Zahel strikes back at him with the laundry; as they fight, Zahel gets Kaladin to search out why he really fights. He asks if Kaladin believes in the Almighty, and they discuss the topic until Kaladin finds himself on the ground with his own knife to his head. Zahel tells him to return when he can truly hate the fight. Kaladin asks him if he is like Hoid, which leads to an explanation of Zahel's understanding of Invested entities before Kaladin finally leaves him.


