Part 1: Burdens

Chapter 16: An Unknown Song
Navani Chapters.svg
My final point of the evening is a discussion of Fused weapons. The Fused use a variety of fabrial devices to fight Radiants. It is obvious from how quickly they've fabricated and employed these countermeasures that they have used these in the past.

Characters
Navani Kholin (point of view)
Szeth
Nightblood
Gavinor Kholin
Benneh
Elthebar
Dalinar Kholin
Taravangian
Talnah
Nem
Adolin Kholin
Shallan Davar
Dieno
Rushu (mentioned only)
Gavilar Kholin (mentioned only)
Nergaoul (mentioned only)
Taravangian (mentioned only)
Nale (mentioned only)
Elhokar Kholin (mentioned only)
Aesudan Kholin (mentioned only)
Jasnah Kholin (mentioned only)
Odium (mentioned only)
Rlain (mentioned only)
Eshonai (mentioned only)
Plot Summary
Navani is visiting Szeth in his cell sixteen days after the test of the Fourth Bridge. She compares the sphere that Gavilar gave Szeth as he was dying to a sphere of Voidlight stolen from a singer. While both glow an impossible purple-on-black that Rushu describes as hyperviolet, the air warps around the sphere Szeth had provided, evoking a wrongness. Navani is befuddled as to where Gavilar could have gotten it let alone all the other spheres she saw that night. Since the test, Navani has been working on practical issues in the tower and has not heard again from the spanreed messenger. Navani turns her attention to Szeth and his strange Blade; she wants to sink the Blade in the ocean like they'd done to the gemstone imprisoning the Thrill and execute Szeth, but Dalinar wants him alive and thinks the Blade is safest in his possession. Szeth has been granted his simple requests of white clothes, a shaving razor, a blanket, a bath a day, and lots of light. Szeth says he has found a better way by swearing to Dalinar, but this doesn't relieve Navani's fears. Navani asks Szeth about the night of Gavilar's assassination again. Szeth recounts how Gavilar trusted him with the sphere as he was not sent from the men Gavilar feared had sent him, then after writing down Gavilar's last words, Szeth hid the sphere. Szeth had retrieved the sphere a month ago, only after Navani explicitly asked if Gavilar had given him anything. Navani would like to study the Blade, but being around Szeth makes her sick. Szeth is pleased that when he asks Navani if she hates him, she says yes.

An hour later, Navani is up on Urithiru's Cloudwalk. She marvels at the design of the tower and the views, now being enjoyed by many diverse people. Navani meets up with Gavinor and his nursemaid and gives him a big hug. Gavinor has been improving since his trauma in Kholinar, but is still very solemn. He tells Navani about riding horses with Adolin and asks to have sword training with Dalinar. Navani laments that Elhokar is missing out on all of this. Leaving Gavinor with his nursemaid, she goes to the research station. The head scientist, Brother Benneh, tells her about the atmospheric conditions around the tower which adapt to the storms. Navani spots Dalinar walking with Taravangian and notices the tension between them that has been there since it was discovered Taravangian was using Szeth as an assassin. Dalinar's image is also suffering since he released his memoir that detailed the atrocities he committed in the Kholin unification war. Navani moves on to talk with the engineers constructing a set of telescopes, Talnah and Nem. She asks them to inspect the strange sphere, and they note that it is a practically flawless gem that will hold Voidlight for years. The engineers also note the wrongness of the light and ask to study it further. Navani is hesitant, but agrees as long as they keep it secret. Navani heads to the meeting chamber and reviews notes she took of Rlain's observation of the strange sphere. He said it felt painful and that it has a song he has never heard. Adolin and Shallan arrive for the meeting, escorting the Mink and discussing his escapology techniques. Dalinar arrives and squabbles with Shallan over Adolin. The Mink implies that his wife and son died in a war caused by Dalinar. The Mink asks where the maps are, and Dalinar and Shallan summon the Stormlight map.


