Part 1: Burdens

Chapter 18: Surgeon
Kaladin's Chapters.svg
The Fused have a second metal I find fascinating—a metal that conducts Stormlight. The implications for this in the creation of fabrials are astounding. The Fused use this metal in conjunction with a rudimentary fabrial—a simple gemstone, but without a spren trapped inside.

How they pull Stormlight out of a Radiant and into this sphere remains baffling. My scholars think they must be employing an Investiture differential. If a gemstone is full of Stormlight—or, I assume, Voidlight—and that Light is removed quickly, it creates a pressure differential (or a kind of vacuum) in the gemstone. This remains merely a theory.

Characters
Kaladin (point of view)
Sylphrena
Lirin
Hesina
Lunamor (mentioned only)
Skar (mentioned only)
Drehy (mentioned only)
Sigzil (mentioned only)
Teft (mentioned only)
Dalinar Kholin (mentioned only)
Navani Kholin (mentioned only)
Oroden (mentioned only)
Laral Roshone (mentioned only)
Jasnah Kholin (mentioned only)
Elhokar Kholin (mentioned only)
Taravangian (mentioned only)
Plot Summary
The Fourth Bridge is approaching the Shattered Plains, so Kaladin operates the Oathgate to take himself there, then Lashes himself into the sky, landing on the ship. An hour later, he leads his parents up to the sixth floor to show them the neighborhood that has been arranged for the former Hearthstone residents. Syl, Hesina, and Lirin banter in the hallways before they reach the rooms. Kaladin shows them around the area, assuming that Lirin disapproves of the arrangements because of his silence. Syl excitedly leads the group to the rooms they have prepared for Kaladin's family and gives them a tour of a sitting room with a full bookshelf, Oroden's room, and a fully stocked surgery. Lirin finally admits that he thinks his kind of medical care is obsolete now, but Kaladin is able to explain to him that it isn't. At Syl's prompting, Kaladin tells his overjoyed parents that he has retired from battle and wants to be a surgeon with his father.


