Part 1: Burdens

Chapter 19: Garnets
Navani Chapters.svg
The world becomes an increasingly dangerous place, and so I come to the crux of my argument. We cannot afford to keep secrets from one another any longer. The Thaylen artifabrians have private techniques relating to how they remove Stormlight from gems and create fabrials around extremely large stones.

I beg the coalition and the good people of Thaylenah to acknowledge our collective need. I have taken the first step by opening my research to all scholars. I pray you will see the wisdom in doing the same.

Characters
Navani Kholin (point of view)
Rushu
Tomor
Falilar
Fen Rnamdi
Kmakl
Dalinar Kholin
Taravangian
Noura
Yanagawn
Jasnah Kholin
Vexil
Malata
Lift
Sigzil
Renarin Kholin
Godeke
Shallan Davar
Adolin Kholin
Glys (mentioned only)
Kaladin (mentioned only)
Dali (mentioned only)
Sebasinar (mentioned only)
Savrahalidem (mentioned only)
Hanavanar (mentioned only)
Ishar (mentioned only)
Dieno (mentioned only)
Odium (mentioned only)
Wyndle (mentioned only)
Gavilar Kholin (mentioned only)
Torov Sadeas (mentioned only)
Plot Summary
Navani visits Rushu in the crystal pillar room, where Rushu informs her that she hasn't made any progress mapping the gems on the pillar to fabrial constructions. She tells Navani that the captured suppression fabrial contains a corrupted spren, and Navani directs her to try to reverse the fabrial's effects. They discuss the tower's security, and then Navani visits the other scholars in the old gem archive room, where Tomor and Falilar show her their personal lifting fabrial prototype. After they convince her to try it out, she takes Falilar to a deep shaft that she has outfitted with several pulley systems. Explaining how this can replace some of the demand for manpower, she tasks him with designing a fabrial that can be linked to the pulleys.

The coalition of monarchs gathers later that day, and Navani immediately runs into Taravangian. He sincerely and terrifyingly, to her mind, explains that he has always been looking out for the future of Roshar before Noura begins the meeting by having Dalinar outline his proposed attack on Emul. Yanagawn shortly adds his support, followed by Taravangian; the latter's agreement causes the Alethi to second guess their idea. When Queen Fen approves the mission as well, she brings up the dearth of honorspren, so Sigzil brings up the idea of sending an envoy to their capital. After discussing their options, Shallan volunteers to lead the mission along with Adolin; they decide to take Godeke, an Edgedancer, as well as a Truthwatcher and a Stoneward. After dinner with the Thaylen leaders, Navani relaxes with Dalinar by their heating fabrial. They sift through Taravangian's motivations together before Dalinar asks Navani to stay behind to run the tower while he is in Emul.


