Part 1: Burdens

Chapter 17: A Proposal
Navani Chapters.svg
The simplest Fused weapon against us isn't truly a fabrial, but instead a metal that is extremely light and can withstand the blows of a Shardblade. This metal resists being Soulcast as well; it interferes with a great number of Radiant powers.

Fortunately, the Fused seem unable to create it in great quantities—for they equip only themselves, and not their average soldiers, with these wonders.

Characters
Navani Kholin (point of view)
Shallan Davar
Dalinar Kholin
Dieno
Jasnah Kholin
Hoid
Adolin Kholin
Shalash
Taln
The Stormfather (mentioned only)
Elhokar Kholin (mentioned only)
Odium (mentioned only)
Ishar (mentioned only)
Fen Rnamdi (mentioned only)
Torol Sadeas (mentioned only)
Meridas Amaram (mentioned only)
Taravangian (mentioned only)
Malata (mentioned only)
Teshav (mentioned only)
Jezrien (mentioned only)
Szeth (mentioned only)
Plot Summary
Navani watches carefully as Dalinar and Shallan form a map of Roshar from Stormlight. The Mink, enthralled, closely examines it and tests out various features that the Radiants can employ. Jasnah and Wit walk in, and Jasnah immediately asks for the Mink's thoughts on their situation. They discuss the status of the conflict while the Mink walks through the areas mentioned. Asking why they are showing him such information, Dalinar admits that they want his help and promises to help free Herdaz in return. The Mink tumbles to the fact that they are preparing for Taravangian to betray them and brings up their planned offensive to retake Alethkar. Declaring that he is willing to help the man who could write a book like Oathbringer, he tells them that it would be a mistake to attack Alethkar. He points them toward Emul instead, and Jasnah agrees to get him more detailed reports to see if his idea is really workable. After dismissing him with Adolin and Shallan so the couple can get him the maps and reports he needs, Jasnah persuades Dalinar that it is best to listen to him and forego Althkar for now. She sends Wit to fetch the Heralds, and they discuss Jasnah's new law to free all Alethi slaves while they wait. When Wit returns with Ash and Taln, Jasnah has Ash tell Dalinar about the possibility of restoring the Oathpact. Then they discuss Shinovar, which Jasnah touts as one more reason to win stability in Makabak.


