Part Four: Storm's Illumination

Chapter 68: Eshonai

They named it the Final Desolation, but they lied. Our gods lied. Oh, how they lied. The Everstorm comes. I hear its whispers, see its stormwall, know its heart.

Characters

Adolin Kholin (point of view)

Teft (point of view)

Dalinar Kholin (point of view)

Kaladin (point of view)

Drehy

Skar

Sigzil

Peet

Rock

Lopen

Parshendi Shardbearer

Moash

Syl

Havar

Nacomb Gaval

Malan

Malop (mentioned only)

Jaks (mentioned only)

Narm (mentioned only)

Torol Sadeas (mentioned only)

Meridas Amaram (mentioned only)

Plot Summary

Adolin

Adolin cuts through the Parshendi lines leading the remaining Kholin forces down the slope of the 'Tower' towards the bridge at the western side of the plateau. The maneuver is reckless but his troops are well trained and they make their mad dash for freedom.

Teft

Meanwhile, Teft, along with the other members of Bridge Four, are transfixed watching Kaladin engage the Parshendi. He moves with inhuman speed and precision. He also moves with a glow that Teft knows is Stormlight. Members of the crew momentarily gawk at Kaladin's unnatural skill. But Teft quickly commands them into a defensive formation intended to support Kaladin and to hold the bridge's position on the plateau.

Dalinar

Dalinar fights, making his way to the bridgemen he had seen return to the plateau. Now unable to see them, he thinks that they have certainly died by now. But he thanks them for giving him and his men purpose as they fight to their doom. But as he approaches the chasm he finds that the bridgemen are indeed holding their ground. He orders Adolin forward to support the bridgemen and he turns his attention towards maintaining the corridor that is allowing his men to escape. However, a seven-foot-tall Parshendi in Shardplate steps forward. Dalinar is surprised by the Shardbearer's late arrival but concludes that he is there to prevent Dalinar's retreat which was now possible. Dalinar quickly finds himself at a disadvantage due to the damage to his Shardplate already sustained but is able to lure the Shardbearer up on a rock formation where he cuts the rock out from under his attacker. This topples the Shardbearer onto the ground. He cuts free another piece of rock onto the Shardbearer, but the damage to his own Shardplate slows Dalinar too much to take advantage of Shardbearer's position. Unable to flee, Dalinar continues to fight.

Kaladin

Kaladin and Bridge Four fight to hold their bridgehead for what seems like hours to Kaladin. During this time Kaladin finds himself gaining respect for the Parshendi's battlefield ethics. He seems to find in the Parshendi what he had hoped to find in the warcamps of Alethi. The Kholin army finally breaks through the Parshendi lines and takes control of the bridge, defending both sides of the chasm. Kaladin stops to take a report from his men only to find that Malop, Earless Jaks, and Narm are dead. He orders his men back across the bridge to the staging chasm. With Moash, Kaladin looks to the lead of the retreat. Unable to find a suitable officer, Kaladin promotes a very young lighteyed soldier and gets him to organize the retreat. He then finds an officer of the Cobalt Guard and asks why they aren't crossing; they are sworn to protect Adolin, so they refuse to go. So Kaladin finds Adolin and commands him to cross the bridge. He doesn't want to abandon his father, so Kaladin promises to help him while they retreat. The Cobalt Guard follows Kaladin but can't keep up.

Dalinar

Dalinar takes multiple hits to his helm, which finally explodes, leaving him dazed and confused. His Parshendi enemy doesn't finish him off, though, instead leaning down to him and saying, "It is you. I have found you at last." There is a disturbance in the Parshendi ranks, and Dalinar sees a glowing Spearman approaching.

Kaladin

Kaladin finds a hole in the armor of the Parshendi looming over Dalinar and strikes, using Stormlight-enhanced strength. The surrounding Parshendi start chanting "Neshua Kadal" and fearfully back away, not attacking. He finds Gallant and brings him over to Dalinar.

Dalinar

Dalinar gets up and wants to finish off the Shardbearer, but Kaladin calls upon his honor to retreat immediately since no one will leave without him. He agrees and calls the retreat, galloping toward the bridge with Kaladin and the Cobalt Guard following. They go across and the Parshendi do not give chase. The Parshendi Shardbearer salutes Dalinar. He finds Kaladin and vows to protect him from Sadeas if he will join his army. Kaladin agrees since they can't very well escape now with so many wounded and little supplies.

