Part Two: The Illuminating Storms

Chapter 27: Chasm Duty

If anything I have said makes a glimmer of sense to you, I trust that you'll call them off. Or maybe you could astound me and ask them to do something productive for once.

Characters

Kaladin (point of view)

Teft

Rock

Gaz

Syl

Dunny

Skar

Moash

Sigzil

Peet

Yake

Maps

Narm

Drehy

Jaks

Torfin

Hobber

Leyten (mentioned only)

Dabbid (mentioned only)

Lirin (mentioned only)

Tien (mentioned only)

Torol Sadeas (mentioned only)

Tukks (mentioned only)

Hesina (mentioned only)

Jezrien (mentioned only)

Nale (mentioned only)

Plot Summary

Kaladin visits the apothecary again to sell his knobweed sap. The apothecary pretends that "wild" knobweed isn't as effective and tries to swindle Kaladin. With the help of Syl, he sees through the ruse and gets a better price. He considers escaping, but he can't bring himself to leave the bridgemen. Gaz has changed Bridge Four's work duty to chasm duty because the other bridges resent them for getting away with breaking rules by bringing back wounded.

Down in the chasms they have to look for corpses to get their equipment and whatever else can be found. Kaladin, Teft and Rock walk ahead talking. They find Dunny listening, try to make him participate, and it works. As the tension eases, they discover that Dunny can sing. The other crew members still remain aloof.

Eventually they find a lot of corpses and begin their morbid work. Kaladin picks up a spear and gets overwhelmed by his memories. At first, most of the others jeer him for pretending to be their leader, but after he finishes his kata, they stare in amazement. Remembering that they have work to do or they'll get in trouble, he drops the spear and tells them to get to work. Teft is clearly impressed, but Kaladin down plays the issue.

Later, Syl looks with Rock and Dunny for more corpses and they find Parshendi. They discover that the Parshendi's armor is grown from their bodies.

The crew finishes their chasm duty and goes back to the ladders. Kaladin muses how to get the crew together and comes up with an idea. Back at the barracks he and Rock buy a cauldron and supplies and Rock cooks an evening stew for all the men of Bridge Four. One by one they all eventually come out of the barrack and sit around the fire, eating Rock's stew.

The next morning, many more members of Kaladin's crew get up early to work out.

