Part Three: Dying

Chapter 29: Errorgance

The ones of ash and fire, who killed like a swarm, relentless before the Heralds

Characters

Shallan Davar (point of view)

Jasnah Kholin

Eylita Tavinar

Balat Davar

Jushu Davar

Wikim Davar

Taravangian

Masly (mentioned only)

Coldwin (mentioned only)

Hasavah (mentioned only)

Luesh (mentioned only)

Lin Davar (mentioned only)

Hanavanar (mentioned only)

Mederia (mentioned only)

Gavilar Kholin (mentioned only)

Szeth (mentioned only)

Sadees (mentioned only)

Gavarah (mentioned only)

Gregorh (mentioned only)

Varas (mentioned only)

The Almighty (mentioned only)

Dalinar Kholin (mentioned only)

Plot summary

Shallan

Shallan is talking to her brothers and Balat Davar's betrothed, Eylita Tavinar, over spanreed in her quarters, discussing how to get to Jasnah's Soulcaster. She considers how difficult it will be for her not to fall in love with the freedom and the studying, when Balat informs her, after having sent his brothers out, that Luesh has died. He also tells her that some "friends" of their fathers came by some weeks later "suggesting" Balat should return the Soulcaster. Balat believes that they are the owners of the Soulcaster and are very dangerous. Balat has Eylita draw a picture of a symbol found on a pendant worn by Luesh; he also mentions that one of the "friends" had the same pattern tattooed on his thumb. The conversation ends, and Shallan burns the transcript in the sitting room's fireplace before heading back to her studies.

Five hours later while studying the Alethi monarchy, Shallan tells Jasnah that she thinks the authors are "errorgant". Jasnah informs her that this is the "Assuredness Movement" in which the authors overstated their cases. Shallan wonders why she is researching events as recent as the murder of King Gavilar, to which Jasnah replies that she thought to ease Shallan into true scholarship this way. The discussion moves on to Shallan's habit of saying the first passable clever thing that comes into her mind, speaking of the incompetence of her former tutors and their punishments. Jasnah believes Wit would find her amusing. They move on and talk about what Shallan has learned about Gavilar's murder, and later about youth and scholarship. Shallan wonders at the nature of Jasnah's closely guarded work.

Two hours later Taravangian comes to their balcony joining them at lunch. After Jasnah breaks the silence with a question about his granddaughter, Taravangian asks about Jasnah's Soulcaster, but Jasnah evades the question. He then asks Shallan if she could do a drawing of him, which he intends as a gift for his granddaughter. While Shallan is drawing, Taravangian and Jasnah discuss the Almighty, Jasnah's lack of faith, and the concept of right and wrong. When inspecting her finished picture Shallan realizes that she has drawn some creatures with symbols as heads (Cryptics). She hurriedly crumples the page and claims to have made a mistake. She offers to do a new one for the King by the end of the day. After the King has left, Jasnah and Shallan have a talk about him, during which Jasnah expresses a tentative openness to the possibility that she might join a Devotary at some point. The two continue the discussion about faith for a short while before Jasnah tells Shallan to get on with her sketch for the King.

