Part Three: Dying

Chapter 33: Cymatics

They changed, even as we fought them. Like shadows they were, that can transform as the flame dances. Never underestimate them because of what you first see.

Characters

Shallan Davar (point of view)

Kabsal

Jasnah Kholin

Talatin (mentioned only)

Guvlow (mentioned only)

Myalmr (mentioned only)

Lin Davar (mentioned only)

Balat Davar (mentioned only)

Wikim Davar (mentioned only)

Jushu Davar (mentioned only)

Gavilar Kholin (mentioned only)

Habsant (mentioned only)

Plot summary

Shallan

Shallan is thinking about how she sometimes gets distracted by the enormity of the Palanaeum. Along with a Parshman servant, she is on her way to get a copy of Dialogues, though she now has an hour each day to do her own research. She has decided on natural science. She thinks about how she could fill gaps in her understanding and has to remind herself that her true goal is to steal Jasnah's Soulcaster. Hiding in one of the library rooms, she goes through some of the sketches she has of Jasnah soulcasting and hopes that with it she will be able to create the mineral deposits to save her family. Comparing her expectation of Jasnah the heretic and the real one, Shallan worries that she might not be able to actually do it. She speculates about talking to Jasnah about the use of a Soulcaster but is startled by a light and decides to get back to her task. She realizes that she's in the room where she can find Shadows Remembered. She was surprised to find that it contained children's stories.

When Shallan returns to the alcove, she finds that Jasnah has not yet returned, but to her surprise Kabsal is present. Apparently he wants to show something to Jasnah, but has some bread and simberry jam to share with Shallan. After a discussion about the meaning of the jam and Shallan's personality, they move on to Shallan's appearance and what she thinks of herself. They also discuss Jasnah's heresy. Shallan considers Kabsal in a romantic light for a short time before dismissing it. Kabsal tries to get Shallan to switch Devotaries even though it is apparently frowned upon to recruit. Kabsal intended to show Jasnah proof of the Almighty, which Shallan is curious to see. He gets out a book where he shows her four patterns of the cities Kholinar, Vedenar, Thaylen City, and Akinah. Using a metal plate with sand and a bow, he recreates the patterns in the sand through the resonance, telling her that this is called Cymatics. Telling her of more examples he considers proof, he guides the conversation to saving her soul. When Jasnah appears she is not surprised to see Kabsal but not pleased either. She reveals that she knows about Cymatics but doesn't seem impressed by it. After Kabsal is gone, Jasnah warns Shallan that Kabsal is only interested in Shallan to get to Jasnah and her soulcaster.

