Part Four: Storm's Illumination

Chapter 57: Wandersail

I hold the suckling child in my hands, a knife at his throat, and know that all who live wish me to let the blade slip. Spill its blood upon the ground, over my hands, and with it gain us further breath to draw.

Characters

Kaladin (point of view)

Maps

Skar

Yake

Teft

Syl

Lopen

Rock

Moash

Hoid

Arik (mentioned only)

Lirin (mentioned only)

Miasal (mentioned only)

Dunny (mentioned only)

Amark (mentioned only)

Goshel (mentioned only)

Dallet (mentioned only)

Nalma (mentioned only)

Tien (mentioned only)

Hashal (mentioned only)

Gaz (mentioned only)

Dalinar Kholin (mentioned only)

Torol Sadeas (mentioned only)

Hav (mentioned only)

Meridas Amaram (mentioned only)

Derethil (mentioned only)

Nafti (mentioned only)

Sigzil (mentioned only)

Peet (mentioned only)

Plot Summary

Maps dies of an arrow wound in the chest, and Kaladin agonizes over the loss, as he always does. After the bridge run, Kaladin insists on treating Teft's wounded arm. Teft prods Kaladin to see if he has had any "odd experiences" lately. When Kaladin tells him he's noticed nothing, Teft moves to punch Kaladin. Reacting instinctively, Kaladin breathes in all the Stormlight in the spheres he's carrying in preparation for self-defense. Teft points out that all the spheres are now dun, and Lopen notices that Kaladin's medical pack is sticking to the side of a barrel. Panicking at finally noticing his powers, Kaladin runs off to try to get rid of the Stormlight and figure out what's wrong with him. Syl admits that she's not a Windspren. She doesn't remember much, but she knows that she binds things. She says that Kaladin is changing because of her, that she takes something from him, and gives something in return.

Kaladin wanders off to be alone as evening falls. He finds Hoid playing a flute. He tells him the story of Derethil and the Wandersail. At Hoid's prompting, Kaladin concludes that the moral of the story is taking responsibility. He decides that he must take responsibility and do whatever he can to save Bridge Four, even if that means embracing strange and frightening powers. Hoid gives him a flute and tells him to take care of Sigzil. Kaladin returns to the group and asks Teft how he knew what he is. Teft says that when he was a youth, his family belonged to a secret sect that awaited the return of the Knights Radiant. He asks Teft how much he knows of his powers, and Kaladin decides to try to find out more.

