Part Four: Storm's Illumination

Chapter 58: The Journey

Re-Shephir, the Midnight Mother, giving birth to abominations with her essence so dark, so terrible, so consuming. She is here! She watches me die!

Characters

Adolin Kholin (point of view)

Dalinar Kholin (point of view)

Jakamav

Inkima

Danlan

Toral

Eshava

Resi

Torol Sadeas

Elhokar Kholin

Navani Kholin

Vamah

Istow

Re-Shephir (mentioned only)

Roion (mentioned only)

Aladar (mentioned only)

Renarin Kholin (mentioned only)

Nohadon (mentioned only)

Wit (mentioned only)

Gavilar Kholin (mentioned only)

Szeth (mentioned only)

Plot Summary

Adolin

Adolin is drinking at a wineshop in the outer Market, accompanied by his date Danlan, and fellow lighteyes Jakamav, Inkima, Toral and Eshava. They debate why Sadeas has not moved against Dalinar and whether Dalinar should step down due to his visions and unpopular restrictions on the army. Adolin leaves to prepare for a duel with Brightlord Resi. While walking through the market, he contemplates his father's efforts bringing unity and discipline to the Alethi armies and people. He notices officers from other armies exhibit a cavalier and unorganized attitude towards the war. He begins to come around to Dalinar's newfound severity towards progressing the war effort and Alethi unification.

Dalinar

As Sadeas and Elhokar watch some lesser lighteyes duel, waiting for Adolin's bout to begin, Dalinar recites a passage from The Way of Kings about Nohadon's journey to Urithiru. Sadeas dismisses the story as boring and sentimental and insults Dalinar, though Dalinar doesn't get angry. Elhokar jokes that Sadeas could be the new Wit, since Hoid vanished as he does periodically. As Adolin and Resi duel, Dalinar states that if he were in charge, he would withdraw the army to Alethkar to stabilize their homeland and send envoys to the Parshendi to investigate Gavilar's murder. Elhokar praises Dalinar's explanation and speaks of plots against him and inhuman faces that he sees in mirrors. Dalinar thinks that he is paranoid. Elhokar gets Dalinar to agree to a joint assault with Sadeas where both army's bridge crews are used, as an experiment. Adolin wins his duel easily. Sadeas asks for a clerk to be sent to him with a copy of The Way of Kings.

