Part Four: Storm's Illumination

Chapter 59: An Honor

Above the final void I hang, friends behind, friends before. The feast I must drink clings to their faces, and the words I must speak spark in my mind. The old oaths will be spoken anew.

Characters

Kaladin (point of view)

Teft

Lopen

Rock

Syl

Hashal

Avarak Matal

Moash

Gaz (mentioned only)

Torol Sadeas (mentioned only)

Dalinar Kholin (mentioned only)

Dunny (mentioned only)

Tien (mentioned only)

Dabbid (mentioned only)

Plot Summary

Kaladin and Teft are in the Bridge Four barracks while Rock runs drills outside and Lopen stands watch at the entrance. Kaladin tries to draw light from an infused sphere but fails, and wonders if he really is a Surgebinder and potential Knight Radiant as Teft insists he is. Teft lectures Kaladin on the First Oath and speaks of The Way of Kings which his mother had read, and which the Radiants based their Ideals on. Brightness Hashal appears, stating that Bridge Four would be on full-time bridge run duty during the day, and chasm duty at night, and that they should feel honored by this, though Kaladin realizes it is a death sentence for his men. After Hashal leaves, Kaladin and the others debate their options, and Kaladin accidentally breathes in Stormlight and starts glowing faintly.

Kaladin gathers his crew in the chasm for their shift and they start spear practice. They still need weeks of practice to be able to escape. Teft leads the drill as Kaladin and Syl investigate some Parshendi corpses. Kaladin cuts off some Parshendi carapace and has Lopen gather some Parshendi bones. He puts them all in a sack. They proceed to a shallow chasm where Lopen had dropped some rope on a prior bridge run. Kaladin whispers the First Ideal of the Knights Radiant and breathes in Stormlight from his pouch of spheres, then uses it to create a makeshift ladder of stones to climb up the chasm wall and tie the sack to the bottom of a bridge for later retrieval. Syl tells him to just cut the rope he's hanging from, ensuring him that he'll be alright. He cuts the rope and falls forty feet to the ground. He lands on his feet and uses his remaining Stormlight to immediately heal his injuries. He tells Lopen to retrieve the sack during their next bridge run.

