Part Four: Storm's Illumination

Chapter 60: That Which We Cannot Have

The death is my life, the strength becomes my weakness, the journey has ended.

Characters

Dalinar Kholin (point of view)

Adolin Kholin (point of view)

Renarin Kholin

Navani Kholin

Nohadon

Torol Sadeas (mentioned only)

Elthebar (mentioned only)

Gavilar Kholin (mentioned only)

Longshadow (mentioned only)

Karm (mentioned only)

Alakavish (mentioned only)

Plot Summary

Dalinar

Dalinar has decided not to abdicate to Adolin. The two wait for the coming highstorm in Dalinar's chambers with Renarin and Navani. Navani has a new fabrial, an early model of a painrial, which she shows the three by using it on an ache in Adolin's hand. Despite all the discoveries the engineers have made with fabrials, they are no closer to making new Shardblades and Shardplate. Dalinar speculates that they were provided by the Heralds themselves, then the highstorm hits, and he enters another vision.

He talks with a man with a regal bearing, who Dalinar later realizes must be a younger Nohadon, writer of The Way of Kings. A Desolation has just ended, and 90% of the people Nohadon ruled are dead. Some of those still alive try to cast blame on the Surgebinder Alakavish, who began a war just before the Desolation started. Nohadon contemplates giving up his throne if he cannot actually do any good with his leadership. Dalinar, who Nohadon believes is his advisor Karm, tells him to write a book about his philosophy on leadership and how people should live. Nohadon scoffs at the idea and says that action and the sword are what is needed. He would like peace, but "to be human is to want that which we cannot have." He walks off. Just before the end of the vision, Dalinar repeats Nohadon's statement.

He comes back to the present time and believes he did little about discovering any facts about proving his visions true or false. Navani cuts him off, asking him to repeat the last thing he said. She then tells him she believes he has been speaking in the Dawnchant, a dead language, and the phrase he just gave her may be the key needed to translate the language. She tells Dalinar and his sons that this is the proof they were looking for and that the visions are real.

