Part Four: Storm's Illumination

Chapter 69: Justice

All is withdrawn for me. I stand against the one who saved my life. I protect the one who killed my promises. I raise my hand. The storm responds.

Characters

Navani Kholin (point of view)

Dalinar Kholin (point of view)

Kaladin (point of view)

Torol Sadeas

Renarin Kholin

Makal

Adolin Kholin

Rust Elthal

Moash

Teft

Avarak Matal

Elhokar Kholin

Teleb (mentioned only)

Nohadon (mentioned only)

Lamaril (mentioned only)

Syl (mentioned only)

Plot Summary

Navani

At Sadeas's staging area Navani forces her way through the crowd after hearing rumors that Sadeas came back from battle without Dalinar. Renarin follows her. Sadeas tells Navani that the Parshendi overwhelmed Dalinar's forces, forcing him to retreat to save his own men. He claims to have witnessed Dalinar fall to Parshendi hammers. Unwilling to believe Sadeas's account, Navani creates an enormous Thath glyph across the staging area stone ground in burn ink. Navani releases her prayer for Justice by lighting glyph, which leaves a scorch mark on the stone. Shortly after the flames die, one of Sadeas's message runner approaches with news of Dalinar's survival.

Dalinar

Dalinar rides at the head of his remaining force. Seething with anger, he contemplates his confrontation with Sadeas. He knows he must first protect Alethkar despite his desire for revenge. As his force approaches the warcamp, Dalinar dismisses his wounded to his camp and offers to send Kaladin's bridgemen with them, but they are determined to see his promise to buy their freedom through. Unwilling to force them to go, Dalinar allows them to accompany him into Sadeas's warcamp. He unexpectedly finds Renarin and Navani in Sadeas's warcamp. He embraces his son and later Navani. He tells Navani that he sees the world differently now and is now unwilling to let 'lying men' control his life. Releasing Navani, he confronts Sadeas. Publicly they feign civility. Sadeas apologizes for overestimating the threat against Dalinar's forces and retreating too soon. But, standing close so as not to be overheard, Dalinar privately asks Sadeas why. Sadeas responds referring to his oath to protect Elhokar, saying that Dalinar is going insane and becoming weak. He feels that these ideas are infecting Elhokar. And, in the end, he just wanted Dalinar gone. In this admission of guilt, Dalinar realizes that acting honorably would never win Sadeas's loyalty.

Kaladin

Kaladin watches the conference between Dalinar and Sadeas with the members of Bridge Four. The private conversation ends, and Sadeas states aloud that their alliance was "unfeasible." Dalinar claims the bridgemen, but Sadeas refuses to let them go. He offers sixty emerald broams for each member. But Sadeas is unwilling to sell, stating that he would not sell them for 1,000 broams and tells Dalinar to leave his camp. Kaladin turns away, thinking Dalinar would not be able to fulfill his promise when there are gasps of surprise. Kaladin turns to see that Dalinar had summoned his Shardblade. Dalinar offers his Shardblade for all of Sadeas's bridgemen. Sadeas accepts and mocks him for giving up his Shardblade for worthless slaves. Unable to believe what has just happened, Kaladin asks Dalinar why. Dalinar explains that Kaladin saved him and two thousand of his men. All of whose lives are priceless. In his opinion, one priceless sword is a small price to pay for two thousand lives, especially to keep his honor.

Dalinar

Dalinar finds Elhokar in the sitting room of the palace wearing his Shardplate. Dalinar initiates a quick brawl in which he kicks Elhokar several times, cracking his Shardplate and repeatedly keeping him from summoning his blade. Dalinar ends the "fight" by breaking Elhokar's breastplate, subduing him. He then demands to know if Elhokar himself cut the girth on his own saddle to get Dalinar to take him more seriously. Reluctantly, Elhokar admits to cutting the girth. An exasperated Dalinar then explains the consequences of this -- including Sadeas's betrayal. Additionally, Dalinar demonstrates how easily he could kill Elhokar, stating that he could have done it a hundred times over and that he is not Elhokar's enemy. Releasing his nephew, he tells Elhokar that tomorrow he will appoint Dalinar as Highprince of War. Determined to finally see the war won and Alethkar united, he decides to stop trying to be Nohadon the peacemaker and return to being the Blackthorn, the warlord. Elhokar is reluctant, fearing rebellion from the various highprinces, but Dalinar turns to leave, confident that he will make the appointment and content knowing the challenges that are before him. Just before exiting, he also informs Elhokar about the courtship between himself and Navani.

