Part Four: Storm's Illumination

Chapter 67: Words

Let me no longer hurt! Let me no longer weep! Dai-gonarthis! The Black Fisher holds my sorrow and consumes it!

Characters

Kaladin (point of view)

Dalinar Kholin (point of view)

Teft (point of view)

Syl

Skar

Avarak Matal

Moash

Drehy

Rock

Sigzil

Adolin Kholin

Lopen

Dabbid

Dalar

Mesh

Varth

Tien

the Stormfather

Torol Sadeas (mentioned only)

Shen (mentioned only)

Toralin Roshone (mentioned only)

Dallet (mentioned only)

Lirin (mentioned only)

Navani Kholin (mentioned only)

Dunny (mentioned only)

Maps (mentioned only)

Meridas Amaram (mentioned only)

Tukks (mentioned only)

Nalma (mentioned only)

Goshel (mentioned only)

Cenn (mentioned only)

Tashlin (mentioned only)

Sheler (mentioned only)

Plot Summary

Kaladin

As Sadeas's forces withdraw, Bridge Four lags behind. Having wounded and already being low in number, they are unable to move ahead of the army and help with the crossing of the staging plateau. Instead of crossing with the army, Kaladin tells Matal that they will rest, use their bridge to follow and catch up later. Kaladin gives the pretense that he doesn't want to slow the rest of the army. The army continues westward without Bridge Four. Kaladin explains to the men that now they can simply escape without fighting. Everything is perfect except the wounded back at camp. Kaladin insists that he stay with the wounded and escape later. Kaladin feels unsettled, and not just because of the men he would have to leave behind. He sees Syl next to him as a regular-sized woman. She stands looking back at the battle with an expression of horror. Kaladin also looks back at the battle. He sees the thousands of dark eyed soldiers hopelessly surrounded. Syl says that she now remembers what kind of spren she is. She is an honorspren. The spirit of oaths, promises, and nobility. Kaladin thinks that trying to save Kholin's army would be suicide and that he and his men owe Dalinar nothing. He is determined not to be fooled again like the time he saved Amaram. Finally he remembers his father's words: "The lighteyes don't care about life, so I must. So we must." With the Ideals of the Radiants forming in his mind he tells the members of Bridge Four that they must go back. They agree and lift their bridge, heading back to the Tower.

Dalinar

Dalinar's Shardplate grows weak. It is losing Stormlight from many small cracks, lending Dalinar less strength. Dalinar continues to fight, with Adolin at the front line of his army, when he sees a lone bridge crew moving towards the chasm. Unsure of their purpose he shows Adolin who thinks it must be some kind of trap. Still unsure, they grab onto this small hope and prepare their men to push towards the bridge crew.

Kaladin

The Parshendi have seen the approach of Bridge Four and prepare to loose arrows. Dalinar has seen too and is trying to make his way there in order to escape. Kaladin barely dodges the arrows, then Syl points to a new contingent of archers, aiming at the unprotected bridgemen. Kaladin yells the command for side carry right and expends a huge amount of Stormlight, attracting all the arrows to his shield. The Parshendi say "Neshua Kadal!" and flee at the display of power. Kaladin is completely drained from the excessive use of Stormlight. The men set down the bridge and prepare to fight another group of Parshendi who heavily outnumber the bridgemen. Kaladin can only lay on the ground in despair, having failed to protect again, just like the day that Tien died.

Kaladin (flashback)

Kaladin's squad is all dead, and he is commanded to go back to the reserves for reassignment. He tries to find Tien's squad and gets caught up in the chaos of battle. After a brief exchange with an enemy soldier, he is conscripted into a new squad. Kaladin sees three messenger boys placed in the front of the battle as a distraction. He rushes over to help defend Tien but is too late.

Kaladin (back in the present)

Syl prods Kaladin to say the Words. He forces himself to his feet and grabs a spear. He runs into the battle and notices that the bearded Parshendi have infused gems woven into their beads. He breathes in Stormlight and regains his strength and heals his wounds. A voice in his head urges again: "the Words." Although he never learned them, he knows them, and whispers "I will protect those who cannot protect themselves."

Teft

Kaladin explodes with energy and light. The bridgemen watch in wonder as Kaladin furiously fights.

