Part Two: The Illuminating Storms

Chapter 21: Why Men Lie

One need only look at the aftermath of his brief visit to Sel to see proof of what I say.

Characters

Kaladin (point of view)

Leyten

Hobber

Dabbid

Syl

Rock

Teft

Gaz

Sigzil

Peet

Koolf

Moash

Bussik

Gaz (mentioned only)

Hav (mentioned only)

Lirin (mentioned only)

Torol Sadeas (mentioned only)

Dalinar Kholin (mentioned only)

Meridas Amaram (mentioned only)

Lamaril (mentioned only)

Plot Summary

Kaladin lies in bed, debating whether or not to get up. Eventually, he forces himself up and realizes that the other bridgemen had all been watching to see if he would get up and continue his training routine from the previous day. Kaladin goes to check on the wounded from the previous day's bridge run. Two of them are, for the most part fine, but one of them badly needs antiseptic.

Kaladin washes the man's wounds with water, then goes out to perform his morning training routine. While jogging with his plank, he talks to Syl. She tells him that some of his men think he's gone mad, and asks him why men lie. Kaladin is unable to give her an answer. Syl claims that the king's uncle doesn't lie, but Kaladin cynically remarks that if someone has lighteyes, they lie.

Gaz approaches and tells Kaladin that Sadeas has ordered that his wounded men not receive food or pay for the duration of the time they can't run bridges. Kaladin is furious, as this means that he'll have to find another way to care for them.

Kaladin goes to the men of Bridge Four and asks them to split their food with the wounded and to contribute their pay for medical supplies. Most laugh at him and leave, but Rock agrees to share some of his food with Hobber, the man who he feels has the best chance of recovering, because he feels he owes Kaladin for running the deathline in his place the previous day. Rock also says that he can see Syl, though she hasn't specifically revealed herself to him.

Kaladin then goes to Gaz and gets his bridge crew assigned to stone-gathering duty for the day. He convinces Rock and Teft to help him gather knobweed reeds over the course of the afternoon.

