Part Two: The Illuminating Storms

Chapter 15: The Decoy

You do not agree with my quest. I understand that, so much as it is possible to understand someone with whom I disagree so completely.

Characters

Adolin Kholin (point of view)

Dalinar Kholin (point of view)

Torol Sadeas

Elhokar Kholin

Renarin Kholin

Wit

Vamah

Gallant

Dalinar's wife (mentioned only)

Gavilar Kholin (mentioned only)

The Almighty (mentioned only)

Roion (mentioned only)

Talata (mentioned only)

Bethab (mentioned only)

Navani Kholin (mentioned only)

Jasnah Kholin (mentioned only)

Nohadon (mentioned only)

Plot summary

Adolin

Adolin is overseeing the cleanup four hours after the chasmfiend attack while the group waits for a bridge crew to come, replacing the bridge the chasmfiend had destroyed in its rampage. He reflects that many of the other lighteyes are treating Dalinar slightly more respectfully and carefully after his earlier rescue of Elhokar, and thinks to himself that it can't last. Having finished his rounds, he approaches Elhokar's pavilion to give his final casualty report.

Dalinar

In the pavilion, Elhokar chides Dalinar for not making serious efforts to win gemhearts, comparing him to Sadeas. Eventually, the conversation deteriorates to taunting, until Adolin calls Sadeas a coward. Sadeas in turn calls Renarin useless, nearly sparking a duel and possibly a war then and there, until he retracts his statement. Wit appears and taunts Sadeas for a while before actually praising Renarin's intelligence.

Adolin

Adolin and Dalinar then go to examine the strap of Elhokar's saddle to see if it could have been cut. Adolin wonders why they're bothering until he realizes that Elhokar believes that the strap was cut as an assassination attempt, at which point he remarks on Elhokar's increasing paranoia. Dalinar tells Adolin to take the strap to a leatherworker to examine, to talk to the grooms about the saddle, and to double the king's guard. Adolin wonders whether Sadeas is behind the cut strap. Dalinar then approaches Highprince Vamah, manipulating him into making greater use of Elhokar's Soulcasters, ensuring continued income for Elhokar.

Sadeas approaches Dalinar to tell him of the success of their manipulation of Vamah, and Adolin realizes that the two of them had planned the entire thing between them. After a brief argument, Adolin and Dalinar leave. Dalinar then tells Adolin that though he hates Sadeas, he's certain that he wouldn't hurt Elhokar. Dalinar reveals that Sadeas was the decoy the night of Gavilar's assassination, attempting to lead Szeth away so Gavilar could escape. He then tells Adolin that Sadeas has sworn to protect Elhokar at any cost, then further discusses Gavilar's assassination and his final words. Elhokar approaches, asking if they've learned anything about the saddle. He and Dalinar then begin arguing, Elhokar insisting that someone is trying to kill him and Dalinar insisting that Elhokar is simply overreacting.

Dalinar

Elhokar leaves, and Dalinar sends Adolin to prepare the soldiers to move. As he begins to make his way back to camp, Dalinar reflects on his failure to determine the meaning of Gavilar's last words and his desire to protect Elhokar.

