Part Three: Dying

Chapter 30: Darkness Unseen

They were suddenly dangerous. Like a calm day that became a tempest.

Characters

Kaladin (point of view)

Gaz (point of view)

Lamaril

Skar

Syl

Rock

Teft

Moash

Bisig (mentioned only)

Torol Sadeas (mentioned only)

Amark (mentioned only)

Koolf (mentioned only)

Narm (mentioned only)

Peet (mentioned only)

Stormfather (mentioned only)

Plot Summary

Kaladin

Kaladin leaves the barracks with the first light of the day in rather good spirits, as he is followed by all twenty nine members of Bridge Four. He thinks that the last holdout Bisig might have been bullied by Teft and Rock but chooses to ignore it. Kaladin has the bridgemen do exercises from his military days, stretches and jumping motion for warm up. Several carpenters and soldiers are watching and laughing at them. Kaladin notices Gaz before deciding that there's still some time before breakfast to practice hauling the bridge.

Gaz

Gaz is contemplating on the loss of his eye and what the ensuing darkness could be hiding, when Lamaril calls him over, to pay his bribe. Gaz only has half of it, one topaz mark, but Lamaril is more interested in Kaladin, noting him as a problem for Gaz. Gaz is unsettled by Bridge Four's training and wonders if Kaladin really did train in the military. Gaz and Lamaril discuss the use of Bridgemen and that Kaladin could become more dangerous. Gaz offers to kill him, but worries about the loss of Kaladin's bribes. Lamaril tells him not to because that would just make the young Bridgeleader into a martyr. He wants Kaladin to fall on a run. Before leaving he threatens Gaz with making him a bridgeman himself. Gaz worries that if Kaladin does get killed, he, Gaz might still end up a bridgeman for not being able to pay off his debt to Lamaril.

Kaladin

Kaladin and Bridge Four are practicing setting the bridge down from a raised position and Kaladin is wondering what it would take for them to practice on a real chasm. He is surprised how good they are considering they have only been training for two weeks. As he sends his team for a break he considers that the last two weeks were in part lucky since they had only two runs and on one they were late. On the other one they "only" lost two men, Amark and Koolf, and only had two wounded, Narm and Peet, but he worries that they only have twenty-five members who can carry since five are wounded in all. Syl joins him telling him that she saw Gaz and Lamaril talking and didn't like the look of them, though she didn't hear what was being said. Considering his men's protection, Kaladin is studying a half finished bridge thinking about using it as a shield. He tells Teft, Rock, Skar and Moash about using a "side carry." It's very awkward to carry that way, so they ask him why they should try it. He doesn't reveal his shield idea but instead tells them it's so they can use different muscles. Before leaving, Moash wants to know why Kaladin made him a squad leader. After Kaladin tells him it's because he's strong-willed, he tells Kaladin that he doesn't trust or like him but is obeying because he's curious what will happen.

Gaz

Gaz is stunned as he sees Bridge Four do the "side carry." He waves Kaladin over and demands an explanation. Kaladin gives him the excuse about utilizing different muscles. Gaz realizes that this might get Kaladin killed on an actual assault and suggests that they should try it on a run.

