Part Three: Dying

Chapter 46: Child of Tanavast

Though I was due for dinner in Veden City that night, I insisted upon visiting Kholinar to speak with Tivbet. The tariffs through Urithiru were growing quite unreasonable. By then, the so-called Radiants had already begun to show their true nature.

Characters

Kaladin (point of view)

Szeth

the Stormfather

Teft

Rock

Sigzil

Moash

Bisig

Dunny

Syl

Lopen

Dabbid

Gaz

Shen

Skar

Adolin Kholin

Tivbet (mentioned only)

Terxim (mentioned only)

Honor (mentioned only)

Odium (mentioned only)

Hoid (mentioned only)

Yake (mentioned only)

Delp (mentioned only)

Hashal (mentioned only)

Torol Sadeas (mentioned only)

Lirin (mentioned only)

Durk (mentioned only)

Tien (mentioned only)

Hesina (mentioned only)

the Nightwatcher (mentioned only)

Dalinar Kholin (mentioned only)

Reral Makoram (mentioned only)

Plot Summary

Kaladin rides the highstorm as he sweeps across Roshar. In the dream Kaladin views many places and people, a large portion of which he had never seen or heard of before. Blowing southwest and then westward, Kaladin sees flashes of lights, almost appearing to be physical things he could touch. Approaching them he sees that they came from a building amidst a city built of a triangular pattern. He bursts in there and sees a man with large Shin eyes, a Shardblade, wearing white (Szeth - the Assassin in White), just after he has committed an assassination. It feels to Kaladin as though the assassin could see him. Nearing the western ocean, Kaladin separates from the storm after hearing a booming voice that shakes the stormwall. This voice calls Kaladin a child of Tanavast and of Honor and warns him that Odium comes. Kaladin asks why there is so much war, and the voice responds, "Odium reigns." Kaladin then awakes inside his barracks, held down by dark figures. He instinctively starts to fight them off before realizing they are his bridge mates. They had to hold him down to stop him from running out into the highstorm while dreaming. They all go out to bathe in the riddens, and Kaladin decides to accept a shave from Rock. Rock reveals that Sigzil is a Worldsinger. Bridge Four is assigned a new crew member, a Parshman who can't bother to give them his name, so they call him Shen.

Kaladin walks around camp to think. He asks Syl about Odium, and she hisses and zips off without a word. Kaladin sees an officer beating a whore in the street and starts to intervene, but he sees a high-ranking officer in blue (Adolin) come onto the scene. The officer backs down and Adolin offers to escort the lady out of the camp. He flips an emerald chip at Kaladin and tells him to pass along a message for him. Kaladin takes the chip but doesn't pass along the message.

