Part One: Above Silence

Chapter 8: Nearer the Flame

Victory! We stand atop the mount! We scatter them before us! Their homes become our dens, their lands are now our farms! And they shall burn, as we once did, in a place that is hollow and forlorn.

Characters

Shallan Davar (point of view)

Jasnah Kholin

Yalb

Artmyrn

Kabsal (mentioned only)

Lin Davar (mentioned only)

Balat Davar (mentioned only)

Wikim Davar (mentioned only)

Jushu Davar (mentioned only)

Helaran Davar (mentioned only)

Tozbek (mentioned only)

Placini (mentioned only)

Gabrathin (mentioned only)

Yustara (mentioned only)

Manaline (mentioned only)

Shauka-daughter-Hasweth (mentioned only)

Rencalt (mentioned only)

Szeth (mentioned only)

Barmest (mentioned only)

Plot summary

Shallan

Jasnah scolds Shallan, telling her that she had already made her decision. Shallan is embarrassed that she disturbed Jasnah again and leaves. After only a few moments, however, Jasnah calls her back and apologizes to her and gives her Shallan's money pouch that she had left behind.

Shallan asks Jasnah to read the letter she had written for her earlier. Jasnah is impressed that she is self-taught and agrees to accept Shallan as her ward once she has adequately learned philosophy and history. Shallan is pleased by this, but worries that she cannot learn fast enough to save her house.

Shallan leaves the Conclave and meets up with Yalb, who has been gambling with some guards. Yalb insists that she is talented enough to be accepted if she would just be more persistent, so she decides to buy a bunch of books on history and philosophy and return to start studying right away, planning to impress Jasnah with her rapid learning just before Jasnah leaves Kharbranth. Before long, however, she is interrupted by Jasnah, who had paid the servants to tell her if Shallan returned to the Palanaeum.

Jasnah asks to see Shallan's satchel. When she comes across Shallan's sketches with notes on biology, she asks why she made them, to which Shallan replies that she wanted to. It is ultimately the fact that Shallan pursues scholarship in her free time, along with her persistence, that convince Jasnah to accept her as her ward.

Shallan reflects that now she's completed the first phase of her plan, but now needs to discover how to accomplish the rest of it without being caught.

