Part Three: Dying

Chapter 49: To Care

Radiant / of birthplace / the announcer comes / to come announce / the birthplace of Radiants.

Characters

Kaladin (point of view)

Syl

Teft

Dunny

Leyten

Dabbid

Rock

Shen

Moash

Drehy

Skar

Lopen

Allahn (mentioned only)

Hesina (mentioned only)

Extes (mentioned only)

Durk (mentioned only)

Torol Sadeas (mentioned only)

Tukks (mentioned only)

Varth (mentioned only)

Gaz (mentioned only)

Avarak Matal (mentioned only)

Hashal (mentioned only)

Plot Summary

Kaladin and the rest of Bridge four are walking through the chasms. Kaladin thinks about where the water goes and if it might be possible to escape to the east if his dreams were real. He is pulled out of his thoughts by Teft who questions him about his health, whether he feels surges of strength or perhaps light. Thinking about it, Kaladin notes how fast he healed and wonders if he might be cursed like someone who sought out the old Magic. He considers if maybe Syl is not the only spren following him, but maybe an evil one as well. They find themselves at a crossroads and Kaladin decides to use this spot for their training. He tells the Bridgemen that normally in military training, the sergeant will attempt to humble the soldiers at first. But they don't need that because they don't dream of glory; they just want to escape and survive. His first lesson is that a soldier should care, not be cold and emotionless. He drops the spear and tells them that the second lesson is to learn to stand before holding a spear. He tells Skar to push him over, and he can't do it, even when others come in to help. He tells Teft to pair them off to practice and to oversee the training, and Teft responds like a soldier, revealing his past military experience. When he looks at Kaladin he can see that Kaladin also noticed it. Kaladin goes a little apart with Rock, who explains why he can't fight. Kaladin sends him along with Lopen, Dabbid, and Shen to collect salvage. When Rock notes that they can't do the work of a whole Bridge crew, Kaladin has Syl make herself visible to the rest so that she can help them search more quickly. Kaladin assures Lopen that he will still receive training but that it is more important now to bring up the quota of salvage so as not to be discovered. He rejoins the crew and helps Teft. The men learn in hours what should have taken them days to learn. Kaladin realizes that the Bridgemen have been prepared for training by the physical intensity of their bridge duty.

