Part Three: Dying

Chapter 42: Beggars and Barmaids

Like a highstorm, regular in their coming, yet always unexpected.

Characters

Shallan Davar (point of view)

Jasnah Kholin

Kabsal

Masly (mentioned only)

Coldwin (mentioned only)

Hasavah (mentioned only)

Cormshen (mentioned only)

Innia (mentioned only)

Talatin (mentioned only)

Guvlow (mentioned only)

Elhokar Kholin (mentioned only)

Tozbek (mentioned only)

Ashlv (mentioned only)

Plot Summary

Shallan

Shallan tells Jasnah that she thinks she was technically right to kill the footpads, but she acted immorally and unethically. Jasnah is satisfied that Shallan has learned a good deal from the lesson and dismisses her for the rest of the day. It's been two weeks since the Soulcaster was stolen, and Shallan is puzzled that Jasnah hasn't seemed to react at all. Back in her chambers, she attempts to use the Soulcaster while humming for half an hour. She wonders if Jasnah might have duped her with a fake. She takes a break and starts sketching, and she suddenly hears a voice asking "What are you?" A maid cracks open the door, and Shallan convinces herself that she must have interpreted the random sounds of cleaning nearby as words. She scolds the maid for going into Jasnah's room, then sends her off to tell Jasnah so she can enter herself. She hurries in hoping to find notes on soulcasting. She instead finds a notebook focused on Natanatan, the Unclaimed Hills, and the Shattered Plains. The two others contain notes on Urithiru and the Voidbringers. Shallan wonders why a nonbeliever like Jasnah would concern herself with what she herself considers fables. A knock on the door reveals Kabsal, who having heard that she has free time, brought some bread and jam for a picnic.

Kabsal explains the stories behind the Truthberry jam. Shallan laments that she isn't much of a scholar since she prefers the outdoors. Kabsal starts flirting, and although Shallan thinks that it wouldn't work out for them, she encourages him. He implies that he might leave the ardentia for her. Shallan steers the conversation to Jasnah. He reveals that his initial plan was to get Shallan to help him steal her soulcaster, but his superiors disapproved. They were afraid that Elhokar might start a war with Kharbranth. Shallan probes for some hints on how to use it. He says you only have to tap a gem and touch the object you wish to change, but Jasnah doesn't do that. Kabsal leaves and Shallan returns inside, finding a note from Captain Tozbek informing her that he will arrive in one week. She wants to study as much as possible before leaving, so she goes back to Jasnah to read.

