Part One: Above Silence

Chapter 5: Heretic

I have seen the end, and have heard it named. The Night of Sorrows, the True Desolation. The Everstorm.

Characters

Shallan Davar (point of view)

Jasnah Kholin

Taravangian

Taravangian's granddaughter

Elhokar Kholin (mentioned only)

Tormas (mentioned only)

Nashan (mentioned only)

Niali the Just (mentioned only)

Nohadon (mentioned only)

Placini (mentioned only)

Gabrathin (mentioned only)

Yustara (mentioned only)

Manaline (mentioned only)

Syasikk (mentioned only)

Shauka-daughter-Hasweth (mentioned only)

Barlesha Lhan (mentioned only)

Fabrisan (mentioned only)

Malise Gevelmar (mentioned only)

Plot summary

Shallan

As Shallan meets Jasnah Kholin for the first time, she admires Jasnah as the ideal beauty – tall, Alethi tan skin, long dark hair. She is talking to a man who Shallan later identifies as King Taravangian of Kharbranth.

Jasnah and Taravangian seem to be negotiating over something, though Shallan can't tell what. As they begin to walk, Jasnah beckons for Shallan to follow. After a preliminary conversation, Jasnah mentions that because Shallan was so persistent in seeking her out, she will hear her petition to be her ward. Shallan is shocked, as she had believed that she had already been accepted as Jasnah's ward.

A lengthy conversation about Shallan's level of education ensues, in which it is decided that Shallan has passing skill in most subjects, is very good in the sciences, excels at drawing and writing (the feminine arts), and is sadly lacking in history and philosophy.

They arrive at the entrance to a room which has been blocked off by a large, fallen stone. Shallan realizes that the king's granddaughter is trapped in the room, and Jasnah is planning to use her Soulcaster to remove the stone in exchange for access to the Palanaeum.

Jasnah Soulcasts the stone, transforming it into smoke. The king retrieves his granddaughter and, when asked, agrees to take Jasnah to the Palanaeum.

Jasnah rejects Shallan as her ward because of her lack of education in history and philosophy. Shallan is frustrated, but decides to persevere. It is then that Shallan reveals that she wishes to become Jasnah's ward not out of scholarly pursuit, but in order to steal her Soulcaster to help her family's finances recover.
